---
sidebar_position: 2
description: Introduce what reactive values are in React.
keywords: [piesdoc, react, react reactive values]
---

import Video from '@site/src/widgets/Video'

# Reactive Values

## What Are Reactive Values?

Reactive values refers to **anything that will cause the component to re-render after a change has been made**, including:

- Values generated by [`useState()`](./use-state).
- Values generated by [`useReducer()`](https://beta.reactjs.org/apis/react/useReducer).
- Props of a component.

Anything not listed here is non-reactive, so updating it will not cause the component to re-render.

:::caution

What about the values generated by [`createContext()`](https://beta.reactjs.org/reference/react/createContext#createcontext)? Aren't they reactive as well when we inject them into a component via [`useContext()`](https://beta.reactjs.org/reference/react/useContext#usecontext)?

Yes, but that only happens **when context value and the function used to update the context value are generated using either `useState()` or `useReducer()`**. If you put a non-reactive value in a context, updating it will not cause the component to re-render.

At the moment, reactive values in React are still coming from `useState()`, `useReducer()`, or the props of a component.

:::

## What Does Render Mean?

In React, "render" means to **run the code in your component from top to bottom, and transform JSX elements into DOM nodes**. Any subsequent render after the very first render is called **re-render**.

## Examples

### Reactive Values

```tsx showLineNumbers
import { useState } from 'react'

export const Example = () => {
  // highlight-next-line
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0)

  const increment = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    setCount(count + 1)
    console.log(count)
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Count: {count}</h1>
      <button onClick={increment}>
        Increment
      </button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

In this example, everytime the "Increment" button is clicked, the value of `count` will be incremented by `1`. Since `count` is a reactive value, the component will re-render after it changes, thus "refreshing" the screen with the latest values.

<Video src="/video/react/reactive-values_reactive.mp4" />

However, you may have noticed that the value displayed in the console is always different from the value displayed on the screen. Good news is, this is not a bug, but it does confuse everyone! We'll explain this when we get to [Component Rendering](./component-rendering), just don't worry about it now.

Also, it's okay if you have no idea what does [`useState()`](./use-state) do. Just keep in mind that changing reactive values will cause the component to re-render and you're good to go!

### Non-reactive Values

```tsx showLineNumbers
import { useState } from 'react'

// highlight-next-line
let count = 0

export const Example = () => {
  const increment = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    count++
    console.log(count)
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <div>
        <h1>Count: {count}</h1>
        <button onClick={increment}>
          Increment
        </button>
      </div>
    </div>
  )
}
```

<Video src="/video/react/reactive-values_non-reactive.mp4" />

In this example, everytime the "Increment" button is clicked, the value of `count` will be incremented by 1. However, since `count` is a **not-reactive** value, updating it will **not** cause the component to re-render, no matter how many times `count` changes.

But be careful, this does not mean the changes of a non-reactive value will never be reflected on the screen! Let's take a look at the following example:

```tsx showLineNumbers
import { useState } from 'react'

// highlight-next-line
let age = 0

export const Example = () => {
  // highlight-next-line
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0)

  const incrementCount = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    setCount(count + 1)
  }

  const incrementAge = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    age++
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <div>
        <h1>Count: {count}</h1>
        <button onClick={incrementCount}>Increment Count</button>
      </div>
      <div>
        <h1>Age: {age}</h1>
        <button onClick={incrementAge}>Increment Age</button>
      </div>
    </div>
  )
}
```

<Video src="/video/react/reactive-values_both.mp4" height="300px" />

In this example, `count` is a reactive value, while `age` is a non-reactive value. Thus:

- Clicking "Increment Count" will update the value of `count`, and the component will re-render.
- Clicking "Increment Age" will update the value of `age`, but the component will **not** re-render.

This is why in the above video, nothing seemed to happen when we clicked "Increment Age" for three times, but the screen suddenly went from `Age: 0` to `Age: 3` after "Increment Count" is clicked, which is confusing.

## When to Make a Variable Reactive

To avoid the problem we see above, we have to be careful when declaring variables. A simple rule of thumb would be:

- Make it a reactive when the value **will change**, and **users must be informed of this change on the screen**.
- Otherwise just make it a non-reactive.
