---
sidebar_position: 4
description: Introduce what are reactive values in React.
keywords: [piesdoc, react, react reactive values]
---

import Video from '@site/src/widgets/Video'

# Reactive Values

## What Is A Reactive Value?

**Reactive value** means anything that will cause the component to re-render after being updated, including:

- Values generated by [`useState()`](./use-state).
- Values generated by [`useReducer()`](./use-reducer).
- Props of a component.

Anything not listed here is non-reactive, so updating it will not cause the component to re-render.

## What Does Render Mean?

In React, "render" means to run the code in your component from top to bottom, and transform the output JSX elements into a DOM node. Any subsequent render after the very first render is called "re-render".

## Examples

### Reactive Values

```tsx showLineNumbers
import React, { useState } from 'react'

export const Example = () => {
  // highlight-next-line
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0)

  const increment = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    setCount(count + 1)
    console.log(count)
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Count: {count}</h1>
      <button onClick={increment}>Increment</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

<Video src="/video/react/reactive-values_reactive.mov" />

In this example, everytime the "Increment" button is clicked, the value of `count` will be incremented by 1. Since `count` is a reactive value, the component will re-render after it gets updated, thus "refreshing" the screen with the latest values.

However, you may have noticed that even though `count` seems to work fine on the screen, the `console.log(count)` is always showing the wrong value. For example, when `Count: 1` is displayed on the screen, `console.log(count)` says the value of `count` is `0`. Good news is, this is not a bug, but it does confuse everyone! We'll get to this eventually, don't worry about it now.

It's okay if you have no idea what `useState()` does; just keep in mind that updating reactive values will cause the component to re-render and you're good to go!

### Non-Reactive Values

```tsx showLineNumbers
import React, { useState } from 'react'

// highlight-next-line
let count = 0

export const Example = () => {
  const increment = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    count++
    console.log(count)
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <div>
        <h1>Count: {count}</h1>
        <button onClick={increment}>Increment</button>
      </div>
    </div>
  )
}
```

<Video src="/video/react/reactive-values_non-reactive.mov" />

In this example, everytime the "Increment" button is clicked, the value of `count` will be incremented by 1. However, the screen always shows `Count: 0`, even though we're very sure `count` has been correctly updated by doing a `console.log(count)` after each click. This happens because `count` is **not** a reactive value; no matter how many times `count` is being changed, the component will never re-render.

But be careful, this does not mean the changes of a non-reactive value will never be reflected on the screen. Let's take a look at the following example:

```tsx showLineNumbers
import React, { useState } from 'react'

// highlight-next-line
let B = 0

export const Example = () => {
  // highlight-next-line
  const [A, setA] = useState(0)

  const incrementA = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    setA(A + 1)
  }

  const incrementB = () => {
    // highlight-next-line
    B++
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <div>
        <h1>A: {A}</h1>
        <button onClick={incrementA}>Increment A</button>
      </div>

      <div>
        <h2>B: {B}</h2>
        <button onClick={incrementB}>Increment B</button>
      </div>
    </div>
  )
}
```

<Video src="/video/react/reactive_values-both.mov" />

In this example:

- `A` is a reactive value, while `B` is not.
- Clicking "Increment A" will change the value of `A`, and the component will re-render.
- Clicking "Increment B" will change the value of `B`, but the component will **not** re-render.

This is why in the above video, nothing happened when we clicked "Increment B" for three times, but the screen suddenly went from `B: 0` to `B: 3` after "Increment A" is clicked, causing users to think that "Increment A" would somhow effect `B` in an incomprehensible way.

To avoid such problems, all we need to do is to choose the correct way to declare variables:

- If the value **will change**, and **users must be informed of this change on the screen**, make it a reactive value.
- Otherwise just make it a non-reactive value.
